Remembering those things. When they were going
from Chihuahua to Adama disguised as peasants, my
father had told my mother that if they ever got
stopped on the way, that if they asked any
questions, they were going to visit relatives at
Adama.
And after a while of traveling, they got stopped
from some armed men. They were asked, where are you
going? And she said, well, we are going to
Chihuahua, I mean the Aldamara, he's a relative.
And my father, he was, had a sarap that was wrapped
around him, you know, so they couldn't see his
face, you know. And then they asked him, well,
what's wrong with him? You know, they meant why he
doesn't say, he says something. Uh-huh. My
brother, because he's got a wound in his leg. Oh,
boy. Oh, my God. And then what happened? Well, then
my father just went up and said, well, I was out
hunting two or three years ago, and I shot myself in
the leg because I don't know too much about
firearms. And they just laughed, you know. And I
said, well. Let him go. And after that, my father
really got mad at my mother. Hurt them? Yeah. And he
got shot? Yeah, and he had a wound. Well, he was
scared. I mean, he always knows. Every time she saw
a man like that, she remembered what she went
through and she forgot what she was supposed to
say. Poor thing. She was afraid of your father,
wasn't she? She was. She was.
She used to tell us, I don't know why I married that
man. I didn't love him, but I had to marry him or
else.
Yes, I remember the time that, she told me about it,
she did. I mean, my mother didn't tell me too many
things about his life, you know. My mother, she
says that the doctor, they operated on him three or
four times, the same woman.
And he told the doctors that he wanted his leg
saved, but tried. But Dr. Hefner, Chihuahua, told
him the leg had to come off because it was going to be
useless. It was going to be just in his way. And my
mother told him that he warned the doctor, he said,
if you cut my leg off, I'm going to kill you. The
doctor, he didn't believe him, too. Because, you
know, he's a patient. And one of his friends told
him, you'd better do what he says. Don't cut his leg
off, because, don't kill him, because if he wants
his leg, let him keep his leg. So they let him keep
his leg, but it was no good to him. He was always
limping, wasn't he? No. Remember Chester?
Chester? Gunsmoke? That's the way my father had
his leg, stiff. He could never bend it. He could
never bend it. Had he been a foot soldier or did he,
was he a cavalry? He was in the cavalry. He had a
horse. Did you show her that picture with all the
things in his head and everything? Yeah. He was
proud to be one of, to be this man. They were all
crazy. They were all crazy. Well, tell about your
father wanting your mother to go to Chihuahua
before you were born. Well, I don't know what it is.
I guess he planned on going back as soon as he could.
And he wanted me to be born in Chihuahua.
And the only reason that my mother, she was afraid
that they did. Trin would be stopping, and one of
the relatives talked to my father, and she got to
agree, you know, to be born here in El Paso. But your
parents were born in Chihuahua? Oh, I mean, were
they married? They were married in Chihuahua. In
Chihuahua, they were married in Chihuahua. Yeah,
they never dreamed of ever coming to the United
States. They never did. But since that incident
when the Morgia was after him and wanted him there
alive, he had to leave the country.
And I guess you could call him a refugee. Well, how
come my parents, I mean my father, my family and my
father, since 1910, they were here. They start
this because I heard from my aunt in Santa Rita,
They had to leave the ranch, because they were near
there, see? And they were taking all the girls. So
they just left since 9th and 10th, and they never
returned. So at that time, everything was
happening by . That's .
I don't know. Because I remember when my aunt was
telling me about Camaro, the people that he burned
over there in Camaro, and the hoyo, you know,
loyote, grandote. Have you been to Camaro? No.
There's a big hole. I don't know if they fixed it
already or not, but where he burned all the people.
Children? I don't know. I think that's just a
story. It isn't. It isn't. Were they alive when he
burned them? Oh, yes. He put some, what's it,
petroleum? He burned them alive. Why? I don't
know. Because he was crazy. I don't know. Was this
Villa? Villa. Don't you remember? I don't know.
You can ask my Tio Rodolfo. He was there. They were
there. Is he still alive? Oh, yes. He's an old man
now. You can tell they were there.
I know that they used to hang a lot of people. I know
about the hanging. Yeah. Because there's a tree
over there in the Mera Placita, Camargo, where
they just put the ropes. Well, when I was a
youngster and I used to go to Chihuahua, we used to
go to the river. And they used to show me the trees,
the tall, big, old, tall trees. where
they used to hang people from.
Did they say why they hung them? Well, the people
that were hanging there were villistas. And they
tell me, that they hung a lot of innocent people
just because they looked villista. I mean, they
actually didn't know for sure if they were
villista, but there were so many people, you know,
that they'd pick them out on the street or went to
knock on the door of a house, and whoever answered
there, he looked like a villista. So they rang him
out. I mean, they were just ignorant people like he
is. Maybe they would have been used to that. Maybe
they were only passing by him.
I don't know an old man that retired from
mountains. He didn't go to Juarez for about 25
years. And this is what happened to him because he
told me about it. He was already living here and
working here in El Paso. And he was from Zacatecas.
In fact, he knew my relatives down there. He said
that one time he went to Juarez when they had this,
the attack Juarez, remember? Well, he went to
Juarez and he was just the bystander that picked
him out. And they put him in between some soldiers
and took him down to the guarnición or whatever you
call it, I mean the cuartel or garrison. And they
interrogated him and they asked him a lot of
questions. And he said the way it looked, they were
ready to shoot him. He was scared and stiff, you
know. And then a man there in Juarez that knows him
by, well, I think it's, he used to own Balderas
Bullring. He called him Gonzales. He was going by.
He says, Rafael, what are you doing there? Come
over here. He says, tell these people who I am. Tell
them where I live. He says, you know, he told them
who he was and where he lived, so let him go. And as
soon as he got back to El Paso, that was it. He went
back to the Quarters for about 25 years. In fact, I
think he started going to the Quarters when I
started working at Momsen's.
Do people talk much about the battles that were
fought near here? Well, no. I remember that my
mother and father, we must have been living in
south El Paso.
Right there, along the river, we had American
forces,
you know, just guarding the river. But they tell me
that they could hear the fighting in the water, and
then a stray bullet would come across and hit
somebody over here, just accidentally.
Did
your father or your mother ever talk about why he
joined with B? I mean, did he believe he was
fighting for anything? Believe in the
revolution? Yes, he did. He did. My father used to
tell me that. In fact, at first, you know, he
thought it was the greatest thing that could have
happened to Mexico.
But as he got older, And the song was happening in
Mexico. He used to say, put it this way. And
then he'd say, you know, a word, you know. In other
words, they fought the battles, but some other
people came over and took over. They took credit
for what they did, in other words. That's what he
meant. that they fought for freedom, for
democracy or whatever they call it then. But some
other people came over and took over and it was the
same old story again. Just one party rule. He
didn't believe in that after that. He thought
maybe there would be a freer elections and all
that.
But after so many years, he got a little, well, in
fact,
oh, he was already sick. He was, you could say, the
last few years of his life. He was disappointed, in
other words, with what had happened.
Well, what, because of the one party, or...? Yes,
because he used to say, somos mismos. He meant, you
know, that nobody else had a chance to run against
the... Well, what about land for the poor and some
of the other idea, or land for the villages and some
of the other ideas of the revolution? Did he ever
talk about those? Yes, he liked the idea. In fact,
he got a... That's how he got his land, or his land
near south of the forest. I don't remember how he
called it. Alaristas or something like that.
Alaristas? Mm-hmm.
But like I say,
overall, he wasn't too proud that it was just a one
party system in Mexico. He thought that Well, I
guess after he was in the United States and so on,
the way things were run, you know, he never voted or
anything like that, but he used to, you know, sort
of, he used to tell me it was sort of fair elections,
in other words. Because in Mexico, a year ahead,
you can know who's going to be elected. Mm-hmm. And
he didn't like that idea at all.
Well,
what do you think about... Did he talk about life
being any better in Mexico or the standard of
living being higher or anything like that? No, he
was disappointed. He was disappointed.
The poor stayed poor. And only the, I guess you
could call them the smart, got rich off of the poor.
He
was not for that. In fact, he wasn't a very well
educated man, but he was smart. Like I tell my boys,
I wish I hadn't had half the rings my father had
because Anything he did, I mean, for instance, he
was a cripple. And I remember, because I was just a
youngster, he bought a car. And he couldn't drive
it because of his disability. So he hired a man to
drive for him. And one time, he couldn't get the
man, or I don't know, he fired him or something like
that, and he said, well, I'm going to drive the car.
And my mom said, oh, you can't drive a car with that
blade. I said, I'm going to drive it. So he made a
contraction where he, you know, it was a driver
car. And he was a very good driver. He was a very good
driver. And at first, Something was going wrong
with the car, so he hired a mechanic to fix it.
Pretty soon, he said, well, I'm not going to pay
anybody just to do that. So he started working on
that car. He used to break it all down, tear it apart
completely, and then assemble it again. And you
know, I mean, I can't do it. I can tear things apart,
but I can't put them together again. And he used
to... do a mechanic job very well, carpentry work,
build anything, you know, things like that, he was
pretty capable. Did he ever talk about any of the
battles or any of the things that he did while he was
fighting for Villa? No, like I said before, he
never did talk to me too much about when he was a
soldier, about his life when he was a soldier.
Did he ever talk with anybody else about it? I don't
think so. I was just thinking that if I ever heard
conversations with him. No? I don't remember him.
I don't remember. You know what he liked to do when
he was in the crowd, conversations, something
like that? He used to learn a lot of poems. He used to
recite, like to recite poems and sing. He used to
play guitar and used to sing. Do you remember what
songs he sang? Oh, a lot of those Pajarito
Barranqueño, La Edita.
He used to sing a lot about Mexico. I forget the
names of the songs. I don't have a good memory of the
names of the songs. They used to sing a lot. And in
fact, my father, he was always a laughable party.
In other words, he always got invited to parties
because he'd carry his guitar with him and he'd
always have him sing. He had a good voice. Or say
poems and
all. I think one poem that I never forgot, and it's a
very small one. What is it? It's called En Esta Vida
Es Y Sillanto, Los Hombres Andres Míos. Somos los
locos que en romería vamos para el camposanto.
Because it got a lot of meaning. Yes, it does. And
that's the only one that I ever learned that I never
forgot a meaning. But I used to say a lot of poems
like that. long, and his favorite play was the Juan
Tenorio. He used to act it out. In fact, in the
party, you know, he'd get a cast of, he'd have a few
beers, a few drinks, you know, get a broomstick,
you know, and he'd act out the Juan Tenorio in the
nest and all that. No, he was at that time. He had a
very good memory, I mean, for him. He learned by
himself. And he knew how to write when he was
little. He knew how to write, read. Had he gone to
school at all? Oh, I think he had about three years
of school. He had about three years of school.
Because that's what happened over there. They
didn't even know how to write and read or nothing.
But I was thinking about my father. Do you know how
to write? Yeah, I know how to write. And your uncle,
when he says, Lado? No.
My family, they all did. You know how to write in
Spanish and English. I see. Can you mention?
What
is this? Well, I guess it's a Nothing strange about
it. The people, you know, during the frontier
days, I mean, they didn't go to school, and still a
lot of people were self-educated. That's right.